# CS 2023 Systems Programming Concepts - Homework #5: Checkers

## The Task

This was one of the last homework assignments given in WPI's Systems Programming Concepts course in the Fall of 2021. We were tasked with constructing a playable game of Checkers from scratch, which included creating a very simple AI that could make valid moves against the player. This was our first homework project full written in C++. While some structural files were provided by the instructor and a few restrictions were placed, all of the decisions on the project's design and implementation were left for me to figure out. 

## My Approach

I decided that the best approach for me was to create a board class that held a 2-dimensional array of what I called game pieces. Each of these game pieces had five states: black checker, black king checker, red checker, red king checker, and empty. I then could write functions in the board class that dealt with moving these pieces and checking to see if the board was in an end state. When I constructed the class for the game pieces, I did it in such a way that I actually never had to swap game pieces in the 2-dimensional array. Instead, all I had to do was flip a few variables if pieces need to be moved on the board. 

I broke the project into its' most crucial parts, with each of them presenting a new challenge for me to overcome:
- Reading the passed command line arguments and making sure they are all valid. If any of these arguments were not valid, the program will ask the human player for valid ones
- Creating the board with the passed parameters
- Starting and maintaining the central gameplay loop, where the program would alternate asking for a player move and picking a move for the computer
- Updating the board to correctly implement the desired move
- Recording the board and the move by writing into a text file
- Investigating to see if the game was in an end-state. If not, continue this central gameplay loop until the game was in an end-state or a certain number of moves had been made

One of the requirements for the project was to create a sequence diagram of the overall design of our implementation. This sequence diagram had to include all of the objects, classes, and functions created for the project and had to be properly formatted in order to show the inner working systems of our project. You can find my comprehensive sequence diagram [here](https://sequencediagram.org/index.html#initialData=C4S2BsFMAIAkHVoGICsAuaBhAFpAxgNaQBOAzgFDkCGewA9sdAIK0PkAOVxoeInAdsGgAFYnQAmAV1og6-Dlx58qg6MFwAhOl3HQAFFp0BKBdxC8BQvQHEqAW0jCQ+SCc5mLKocUjinL0mgAMmgAI3AaAn88SEC9ABkQfiJxRNJgUjdFc2VVPDo7dklgEgBZOgA3WP1E5N804BNxKmAqUKpSGB8qcQAxECh9AHN7SABlVpKmlraOmAB3YjBIfsG9EYcAJVjJcAyTchZ6RgBaAD5RCWlQOQxrECrAy6kZOWgUaHy7OxVdcCSYFwhpIHIJSGgADr8dhiIbEezQABmA0gABpoN0+ij0Ytlqs0dB5thzNhPnRwAwoeoYF8iiVGCBSKiiXROmpJMR+NAwNymdAfgAPaD8EGhEjQOiI9mcijkCl0diE4mDL4-fh-AFUaBwkGQMHQLgwfh0IRUcDgaAVM0gcSUZ7XWRc87MVjEDBMUgEQKIhjCyDzMnfX7Qf78QE60EZKEgKXUz4cnyqKgRvUZA0+bn8K3-W2HV3Qc4XMQvG78O4PaphgOq4PJ4i6sHkPW5+2vJ1namGYi6AzabtGDAASX4YGtAC9qvMwKS45xSJ1xFD3KN6eCMZAevjKJ2+z2u+IjAWzj4-M4YoEQuFItFqgkkikGpkhyPWv8J4FgPM6H6A6GH4yMgwOQYHoaBsHJXQ4wpPAWkdQJJQNc1110dgz1iKFg2AtRv3A8BINwEM6Bg0t4KlM0LSvQhoFQgJKBPG8LzCCJCAYmp73qADMiPM41E0Xd9H3AcRA6ToPy-aBIEKYAAE9oFqf90kCdoqNA3C-iI2C5FI7VRlYyh5UVH1GA3PBSVMrhM14roNyxKByB3HQBN3Q9zhsXS0KEzBuhKA0fx0hwbypHCIMtLgQHCWIMEZCSpNk0hOBiVEoSJEkyQpYh0WiggkiGA11W5NNoM0+Q3ICjzuIc7snOMDBhBE6otR8RESD1c9sP8xw0Iw-L0gYaoeSSaAACYABF+UkhhZMoghtz4xze2MI96LQxjptYu86lSTihKYcRxECKsCsk9qqHYGEFSWFoYD-Dj0na4B4SooqSIlKUaPPJt8tmyB92q-tuNbUtavqwItV+5SCCC9cYViVNMyMn5S30ugFSVFE-WncUTwlRhprAjpCTeOMNkBfLBWFUVxQQ4AOX4QJsA6fgAHIhDFPUJIFGJfF8O1iwdN5zkqvdnNqpZVDjPAEzh9IWkkUgoWpgjQn40CJa08lIG+36Fv+85loCYImOvFa2M2x8hNEJIhCggDXo6kQTfSAYLUG9gIlkoywhNUltl0YMNGYmbyEBx0jyFv6DwweAlh8uNlZ0JnAkl4hEyEGWaflwRvzjXESi3M0hEHKUwETqzAzpEhS5pzlg75tsw7mqqdcj6BSioIhfLsSoYE9tXCmKEgtf45uXLOWkB+IcpHlNhTGmfUc3xA8TDsk9gZJDditru1SQvYVlSHCwYu+n3uCNpGnxVAn4O70AArEFFWDY0uXvwpAmP2ITHH+kp9veTbsaBVRuwsarCXnNUVe69-5bzTBDdqalqL70PjSAoFdGAf1lAZJEvoTKkhJtRNCds+5oNLvkdK9lgER1Ht-Mo3c4jQIaEJIYeoSBXUQhaDB+hlbqFCjmPKuhn4nGzDaQ8ntk6pwIS4fhBo9q+CsnYe6BEbowM+rmcOI8jw0MnnQmeAChLDgXiACceVvbikgbJZRDR4EhXIog+cyDeE2n5Do0+KD+70nIFo3+9DN6MKAT9YeglgbgNBlycxclfG2zgTvPCjjdBaOcY8ZGqNPa2M4YNOMn5vyWNtnoGWZh+C5SnDwuMr9FQYIOOowSDcAnzSCVgXAKlvydBgDGMuH9oygziYknuvpiETyhq0G+iJ+ZchguaSplCNHnC8Tojas99GxgIh-XkcT0Q9HwjAFZqsCLCN0JwsRqCJ4bzNgBSgzYKG1KbtUwWUz6kAFEBT4AHmXZEZAhArKSFSXZ1p9kuN9FoqEOS7p6BGfweu4zwCTKuSA3WZxSqdRcEJAAquwZoPlzKFLkbYBwDtaKXO1jc48vhWKXkDutBh20MDbA-gIgIpAuCyXwe9aoiIxAKJEnQcwV0NSnLum0sM3NbRVOcgDOuQNoDbGrlyIkkBqSMFnLCeECiGaZzaIMK+7dATdJWa48uE9zngDZEXAqVcCJuyoNJSuH5aZyhRoqFKgwLVWsYKq4UJp+Q9G1XsnpdrUaOpgM68UbrjRCFTC1XQPqkh0llCHAWZwjgMHdJ6bBjAfWfOhMUQIGSCII1elCH0HJMxpjhBuekvEVA4wkgAR0kGadqE4xB5mOGKq4bZywnzoEWq2kBmFkHOV9WubbSw1MJSLZgwAShSXapAJ5ksfJBuIKXD+Q86mituTCqhGAcD4AIO1Fp3IllbO7p03y6bu6prLoCrOagtX6BGRC8iJgRWLQ3WO0BJq9nolnc82OyyL2gskOCkdkLoXvrhQim8iy1nQEkGithmLmG6BxTABiq7rnruJaeA2ZLjYG3mQAp80BP2-PRD4FZYZzwMuIEy0Yki2psoKAaecXLiJyOBUIAVkAhUEsCZhosw7HRDiPT0wkBMfXBh-fO3wSV+A+GldAAAKpsZF9zv1Gusgp3oTB4hjHuaogzQ6SyhzfXx0Blwu5-pgCTBi0YyJhvyorGA8duy80E-Gl9-Zk17tAgetpxM6PRW7owK1wBeNrtfVh0lRsWImwIzAojHo92ypKFURgWEnMb0Uqs8JoXyD6zarh2L+HKWKVHh2O546pW00CMp1Th6JRhiIUo220VzHhYw5FgTxnbiSrlTV9cpBdhCAQpC3k9zYrtX+IpQzcb2yeZbmN1Vvt4BvF+AHSIq3+BQ3EHKkgdgARo1MtRd24ovzbcEARfBehfT+dwBmeYBNfKgFcB12FB5W09bLEp8SWgNYqG9H0gitbYgkUhPwZbvgtvSNVRtwgW23NfdHWZrzIgxbWzPlLVQ6c5YKxEy5yC2cz7qzskAA), where I walk through each function with as much detail as possible.

## Obstacles 

- I initially ran into a lot of issues with C++ syntax. Coming from Java, I was glad that some similar structure was returning; however, I was still struggling with some key elements of C that were still present in C++. Specifically, I had a lot of trouble understanding and working with pointers. However, through some self-studying and guidance from the professor, I started to get a good grasp of C++ and was able to push past some of the syntactical errors I was running into. 
- For my implementation of Checkers, I needed to make use of linked lists to hold representations of moves and game pieces. Early in the development of the project, I decided to use the same linked list code that I previously collaborated with another student to make for another assignment. However, it wasn't until when I started to piece all of the project's parts together that I realized that the linked list's remove function was completely incapable of removing from the middle of the list. Adding this functionality was a somewhat quick fix, but I wasted a lot of time and energy trying to trace the bug back to the linked list code. While I wasn't happy with all of the time I had wasted trying to understand the issue, I'm glad that I had this experience as it directly helped me write an improved linked list class for the [course's final](https://github.com/apietrick24/CS-2303-Final-Exam-Lattice).
- One of the purposes of this course was to encourage the use of test-driven development. Multiple tests were required for every function and class added to the project and these tests had to be documented through screenshots of the program both failing and passing them. While I initially was good about writing the tests before function or class's implementation, as I got deeper and deeper into the project, I got caught up in writing the functions and trying to connect them together and forgot about the proper test-driven development pipeline. Doing this definitely caused me a lot of issues later as I had to do more debugging to make sure everything was working as intended. Again, I learned from this mistake and followed formal test-driven development practices on the [course's final](https://github.com/apietrick24/CS-2303-Final-Exam-Lattice). 

## Result

Overall, I was very happy with the end result of this project. Not only did it fulfill all of the requirements for the course, but I was also proud of the design and implementation I had created. If I had one issue with the project, it was with the AI I had created for the computer. This AI was very simple and acted with very little strategy. If I had more than a week to work on this project, I would have definitely created a more complicated minimax algorithm for deciding on the computer's move. Another idea I wish I had time to enact was allowing moves with multiple captures. Currently, this isn't possible in my implementation (as I was running out of time, and allowing for multiple capture moves wasn't needed for the assignment). 

Despite these few regrets, I'm glad for the time I spent on this project, as it made the following assignment, the [course's final](https://github.com/apietrick24/CS-2303-Final-Exam-Lattice), much easier to approach and handle. 
